INSTALL.md, before:

# Installation Guide - Schnelle Umlaute (Fcitx5)

Complete step-by-step installation guide for **Schnelle Umlaute** Fcitx5 addon.

## Table of Contents

1. [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
2. [Installation Steps](#installation-steps)
3. [Configuration](#configuration)
4. [Verification](#verification)
5. [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

---

## Prerequisites

### System Requirements

- **Linux Distribution**: Arch Linux (or compatible)
- **Display Server**: X11 or Wayland
- **Input Method Framework**: Fcitx5

### Required Packages

Before installation, ensure you have the following packages installed:

```bash
sudo pacman -S fcitx5 fcitx5-configtool fcitx5-qt fcitx5-gtk cmake extra-cmake-modules gcc
```

**Package Breakdown:**
- `fcitx5` - Input Method Framework (core)
- `fcitx5-configtool` - GUI configuration tool
- `fcitx5-qt` - Qt integration (required for Qt/KDE apps)
- `fcitx5-gtk` - GTK integration (required for Wayland and GTK apps)
- `cmake` - Build system
- `extra-cmake-modules` - KDE CMake modules (required by Fcitx5)
- `gcc` - C++ compiler with C++20 support

### Check Installation

Verify packages are installed:

```bash
pacman -Q fcitx5 fcitx5-configtool cmake extra-cmake-modules gcc
```

---

## Installation Steps

### Step 1: Clone the Repository

```bash
cd ~
git clone https://github.com/Maik-0000FF/schnelle-umlaute.git
cd schnelle-umlaute/addon
```

### Step 2: Build the Addon

The `build.sh` script automatically configures CMake with the correct install prefix (`/usr`):

```bash
./build.sh
```

**Expected output:**
```
===  Schnelle Umlaute Fcitx5 Addon - Build Script ===
Checking dependencies...
✓ All dependencies found
Creating build directory...
Configuring with CMake...
Building...
[100%] Built target schnelle-umlaute
✓ Build successful!
```

### Step 3: Install the Addon

```bash
cd build
sudo make install
```

**Expected output:**
```
-- Installing: /usr/lib/fcitx5/schnelle-umlaute.so
-- Installing: /usr/share/fcitx5/addon/org.fcitx.Fcitx5.Addon.SchnelleUmlaute.metainfo.xml
-- Installing: /usr/share/fcitx5/addon/schnelle-umlaute.conf
-- Installing: /usr/share/fcitx5/inputmethod/schnelle-umlaute.conf
```

**Important:** All four files must be installed for the addon to work correctly!

### Step 4: Configure Environment Variables

For the addon to work in **all applications** (not just terminals), you must set environment variables:

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.config/environment.d
cat > ~/.config/environment.d/fcitx5.conf << 'EOF'
GTK_IM_MODULE=fcitx5
QT_IM_MODULE=fcitx5
XMODIFIERS=@im=fcitx5
GLFW_IM_MODULE=ibus
EOF
```

**What these do:**
- `GTK_IM_MODULE=fcitx5` - Enables Fcitx5 in GTK apps (Firefox, GNOME apps)
- `QT_IM_MODULE=fcitx5` - Enables Fcitx5 in Qt apps (Kate, Dolphin, KDE apps)
- `XMODIFIERS=@im=fcitx5` - Enables Fcitx5 in X11 apps (legacy support)
- `GLFW_IM_MODULE=ibus` - Enables Fcitx5 in GLFW apps (Kitty terminal, etc.)

### Step 5: Logout and Login

**CRITICAL:** Environment variables only take effect after logging out and back in!

```bash
# Save your work, then logout:
loginctl terminate-user $USER

# Or simply reboot:
sudo reboot
```

**Why?** Environment variables set in `~/.config/environment.d/` are loaded by systemd during login, not during shell sessions.

### Step 6: Restart Fcitx5 (After Login)

After logging back in:

```bash
fcitx5 -r
```

This restarts Fcitx5 and loads the new addon.

---

## Configuration

### Step 1: Open Fcitx5 Configuration

```bash
fcitx5-config-qt
```

A GUI window will open.

### Step 2: Add "Schnelle Umlaute" Input Method

1. Click on **"Input Method"** tab (or **"Eingabemethode"** in German)
2. In the "Current Input Method" section, you'll see a **"+"** button at the bottom
3. Click the **"+"** button
4. A search dialog will open
5. Type **"Schnelle"** or **"Umlaute"** in the search field
6. You should see **"Schnelle Umlaute"** with:
   - **Label:** ä
   - **Language:** de (German)
7. Select it and click **"OK"**
8. **"Schnelle Umlaute"** should now appear in your "Current Input Method" list
9. Click **"Apply"** or **"OK"** to save

### Step 3: Switch Between Input Methods

Use `Ctrl+Space` (default hotkey) to cycle between input methods:
- Keyboard (normal typing)
- Schnelle Umlaute (umlaut mode)

You can see which input method is active in the Fcitx5 system tray icon.

---

## Verification

### Test 1: Check Fcitx5 is Running

```bash
ps aux | grep fcitx5
```

Should show a running `fcitx5` process.

### Test 2: Check Addon is Loaded

```bash
fcitx5-diagnose 2>&1 | grep -i "schnelle"
```

**Expected output:**
```
Schnelle Umlaute
```

### Test 3: Check Environment Variables

```bash
echo $GTK_IM_MODULE
echo $QT_IM_MODULE
echo $XMODIFIERS
```

**Expected output:**
```
fcitx5
fcitx5
@im=fcitx5
```

If empty, you need to **logout and login again**.

### Test 4: Test Umlaut Input

1. Open any text editor (Kate, gedit, Firefox address bar, etc.)
2. Switch to "Schnelle Umlaute" input method (`Ctrl+Space`)
3. **Hold the `a` key**
4. **Press `Space`** (while still holding `a`)
5. **Expected result:** `ä` appears

Try all umlauts:

| Hold | Press Space | Result |
|------|-------------|--------|
| a    | Space       | ä      |
| o    | Space       | ö      |
| u    | Space       | ü      |
| s    | Space       | ß      |
| A (Shift+a) | Space | Ä |
| O (Shift+o) | Space | Ö |
| U (Shift+u) | Space | Ü |

---

## Troubleshooting

### Problem: Addon doesn't show in fcitx5-config-qt

**Diagnosis:**

```bash
ls -lh /usr/lib/fcitx5/schnelle-umlaute.so
ls -lh /usr/share/fcitx5/addon/schnelle-umlaute.conf
ls -lh /usr/share/fcitx5/inputmethod/schnelle-umlaute.conf
```

If any file is missing, reinstall:

```bash
cd ~/schnelle-umlaute/addon/build
sudo make install
fcitx5 -r
```

**Most common issue:** Missing `/usr/share/fcitx5/inputmethod/schnelle-umlaute.conf`

This file registers the addon as an **Input Method**. Without it, the addon won't appear in the input method list.

### Problem: Works in terminal but not in Firefox/Kate/other apps

**Diagnosis:**

```bash
echo $GTK_IM_MODULE
echo $QT_IM_MODULE
```

If both are empty, environment variables are not set.

**Solution:**

1. Re-run environment variable setup:
   ```bash
   mkdir -p ~/.config/environment.d
   cat > ~/.config/environment.d/fcitx5.conf << 'EOF'
   GTK_IM_MODULE=fcitx5
   QT_IM_MODULE=fcitx5
   XMODIFIERS=@im=fcitx5
   GLFW_IM_MODULE=ibus
   EOF
   ```

2. **Logout and login** (not just restart terminal!)

3. Verify after login:
   ```bash
   echo $GTK_IM_MODULE  # Should output: fcitx5
   ```

### Problem: Umlauts not appearing

**Check 1:** Are you on the correct input method?

```bash
# Check current IM
fcitx5-remote -n
```

Should show `schnelle-umlaute` or similar. If not, press `Ctrl+Space` to switch.

**Check 2:** Is Fcitx5 running?

```bash
ps aux | grep fcitx5
```

If not running:
```bash
fcitx5 &
```

**Check 3:** Timing issue

The Hold & Wait pattern requires pressing Space **within 400ms** of holding the key.

Try:
1. Press and hold `a`
2. **Immediately** press `Space` (don't wait!)
3. Release both keys

### Problem: Addon is visible but not activatable / Fcitx5 not responding

If you can see "Schnelle Umlaute" in fcitx5-config-qt but cannot activate it, or if Fcitx5 stopped working after a system crash:

1. **Check Fcitx5 status:**
   ```bash
   fcitx5-remote
   ```
   - Should show: `1` (inactive) or `2` (active)
   - If it shows: `0` → Fcitx5 not initialized

2. **Restart Fcitx5:**
   ```bash
   fcitx5 -r
   ```

3. **Activate addon:**
   ```bash
   fcitx5-remote -s schnelle-umlaute
   ```

4. **Verify:**
   ```bash
   fcitx5-remote -n  # Should show: schnelle-umlaute
   fcitx5-remote     # Should show: 2 (active)
   ```

This is common after system crashes or unexpected shutdowns.

### Problem: Build fails with C++ errors

**Error:**
```
error: 'span' in namespace 'std' does not name a template type
```

**Solution:** You need GCC 11+ with C++20 support:

```bash
gcc --version  # Should be 11.0 or higher
```

If older, update:
```bash
sudo pacman -Syu gcc
```

### Problem: KDE Wayland - Input method not working optimally

If you're using **KDE Plasma on Wayland**, configure virtual keyboard:

1. Open **System Settings** → **Virtual Keyboard**
2. Select **"Fcitx 5"** from the dropdown
3. Click **"Apply"**
4. Logout/login

This enables native Wayland input method protocol for better integration.

---

## Additional Configuration

### Change Default Hotkey

To change the input method switch hotkey from `Ctrl+Space`:

1. Open `fcitx5-config-qt`
2. Go to **"Global Options"** → **"Hotkey"**
3. Find **"Trigger Input Method"**
4. Click and press your desired hotkey
5. Click **"Apply"**

### Autostart Fcitx5

Fcitx5 should autostart by default. If not:

```bash
cp /usr/share/applications/org.fcitx.Fcitx5.desktop ~/.config/autostart/
```

Or use your desktop environment's autostart settings.

---

## Uninstallation

### Remove the Addon

```bash
cd ~/schnelle-umlaute/addon/build
sudo make uninstall
```

Or manually:

```bash
sudo rm /usr/lib/fcitx5/schnelle-umlaute.so
sudo rm /usr/share/fcitx5/addon/schnelle-umlaute.conf
sudo rm /usr/share/fcitx5/addon/org.fcitx.Fcitx5.Addon.SchnelleUmlaute.metainfo.xml
sudo rm /usr/share/fcitx5/inputmethod/schnelle-umlaute.conf
```

### Remove Environment Variables (Optional)

If you want to remove Fcitx5 entirely:

```bash
rm ~/.config/environment.d/fcitx5.conf
```

Then logout/login.

### Restart Fcitx5

```bash
fcitx5 -r
```

---

## Support

For issues, please:
1. Check this troubleshooting guide
2. Run `fcitx5-diagnose` and check output
3. Open an issue at: https://github.com/Maik-0000FF/schnelle-umlaute/issues

---

**Last Updated:** 2025-10-25
**Version:** 0.1.1

Commit message:

feat: Improve tray label and add Kitty troubleshooting
Changes:
- Update tray label from "ä" to "Ää" for better visibility
- Add comprehensive Kitty terminal troubleshooting section
- Document tray icon behavior for different input methods
- Add workaround for Kitty's Wayland input context issue

The new "Ää" label makes it clearer when Schnelle Umlaute is active.
Kitty users can now fix focus issues by using X11 backend.

INSTALL.md, after:

# Installation Guide - Schnelle Umlaute (Fcitx5)

Complete step-by-step installation guide for **Schnelle Umlaute** Fcitx5 addon.

## Table of Contents

1. [Prerequisites](#prerequisites)
2. [Installation Steps](#installation-steps)
3. [Configuration](#configuration)
4. [Verification](#verification)
5. [Troubleshooting](#troubleshooting)

---

## Prerequisites

### System Requirements

- **Linux Distribution**: Arch Linux (or compatible)
- **Display Server**: X11 or Wayland
- **Input Method Framework**: Fcitx5

### Required Packages

Before installation, ensure you have the following packages installed:

```bash
sudo pacman -S fcitx5 fcitx5-configtool fcitx5-qt fcitx5-gtk cmake extra-cmake-modules gcc
```

**Package Breakdown:**
- `fcitx5` - Input Method Framework (core)
- `fcitx5-configtool` - GUI configuration tool
- `fcitx5-qt` - Qt integration (required for Qt/KDE apps)
- `fcitx5-gtk` - GTK integration (required for Wayland and GTK apps)
- `cmake` - Build system
- `extra-cmake-modules` - KDE CMake modules (required by Fcitx5)
- `gcc` - C++ compiler with C++20 support

### Check Installation

Verify packages are installed:

```bash
pacman -Q fcitx5 fcitx5-configtool cmake extra-cmake-modules gcc
```

---

## Installation Steps

### Step 1: Clone the Repository

```bash
cd ~
git clone https://github.com/Maik-0000FF/schnelle-umlaute.git
cd schnelle-umlaute/addon
```

### Step 2: Build the Addon

The `build.sh` script automatically configures CMake with the correct install prefix (`/usr`):

```bash
./build.sh
```

**Expected output:**
```
===  Schnelle Umlaute Fcitx5 Addon - Build Script ===
Checking dependencies...
✓ All dependencies found
Creating build directory...
Configuring with CMake...
Building...
[100%] Built target schnelle-umlaute
✓ Build successful!
```

### Step 3: Install the Addon

```bash
cd build
sudo make install
```

**Expected output:**
```
-- Installing: /usr/lib/fcitx5/schnelle-umlaute.so
-- Installing: /usr/share/fcitx5/addon/org.fcitx.Fcitx5.Addon.SchnelleUmlaute.metainfo.xml
-- Installing: /usr/share/fcitx5/addon/schnelle-umlaute.conf
-- Installing: /usr/share/fcitx5/inputmethod/schnelle-umlaute.conf
```

**Important:** All four files must be installed for the addon to work correctly!

### Step 4: Configure Environment Variables

For the addon to work in **all applications** (not just terminals), you must set environment variables:

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.config/environment.d
cat > ~/.config/environment.d/fcitx5.conf << 'EOF'
GTK_IM_MODULE=fcitx5
QT_IM_MODULE=fcitx5
XMODIFIERS=@im=fcitx5
GLFW_IM_MODULE=ibus
EOF
```

**What these do:**
- `GTK_IM_MODULE=fcitx5` - Enables Fcitx5 in GTK apps (Firefox, GNOME apps)
- `QT_IM_MODULE=fcitx5` - Enables Fcitx5 in Qt apps (Kate, Dolphin, KDE apps)
- `XMODIFIERS=@im=fcitx5` - Enables Fcitx5 in X11 apps (legacy support)
- `GLFW_IM_MODULE=ibus` - Enables Fcitx5 in GLFW apps (Kitty terminal, etc.)

### Step 5: Logout and Login

**CRITICAL:** Environment variables only take effect after logging out and back in!

```bash
# Save your work, then logout:
loginctl terminate-user $USER

# Or simply reboot:
sudo reboot
```

**Why?** Environment variables set in `~/.config/environment.d/` are loaded by systemd during login, not during shell sessions.

### Step 6: Restart Fcitx5 (After Login)

After logging back in:

```bash
fcitx5 -r
```

This restarts Fcitx5 and loads the new addon.

---

## Configuration

### Step 1: Open Fcitx5 Configuration

```bash
fcitx5-config-qt
```

A GUI window will open.

### Step 2: Add "Schnelle Umlaute" Input Method

1. Click on **"Input Method"** tab (or **"Eingabemethode"** in German)
2. In the "Current Input Method" section, you'll see a **"+"** button at the bottom
3. Click the **"+"** button
4. A search dialog will open
5. Type **"Schnelle"** or **"Umlaute"** in the search field
6. You should see **"Schnelle Umlaute"** with:
   - **Label:** Ää
   - **Language:** de (German)
7. Select it and click **"OK"**
8. **"Schnelle Umlaute"** should now appear in your "Current Input Method" list
9. Click **"Apply"** or **"OK"** to save

### Step 3: Switch Between Input Methods

Use `Ctrl+Space` (default hotkey) to cycle between input methods:
- Keyboard (normal typing) - Shows "En" or "US" in tray
- Schnelle Umlaute (umlaut mode) - Shows "Ää" in tray

The Fcitx5 system tray icon displays the current input method label.

---

## Verification

### Test 1: Check Fcitx5 is Running

```bash
ps aux | grep fcitx5
```

Should show a running `fcitx5` process.

### Test 2: Check Addon is Loaded

```bash
fcitx5-diagnose 2>&1 | grep -i "schnelle"
```

**Expected output:**
```
Schnelle Umlaute
```

### Test 3: Check Environment Variables

```bash
echo $GTK_IM_MODULE
echo $QT_IM_MODULE
echo $XMODIFIERS
```

**Expected output:**
```
fcitx5
fcitx5
@im=fcitx5
```

If empty, you need to **logout and login again**.

### Test 4: Test Umlaut Input

1. Open any text editor (Kate, gedit, Firefox address bar, etc.)
2. Switch to "Schnelle Umlaute" input method (`Ctrl+Space`)
3. **Hold the `a` key**
4. **Press `Space`** (while still holding `a`)
5. **Expected result:** `ä` appears

Try all umlauts:

| Hold | Press Space | Result |
|------|-------------|--------|
| a    | Space       | ä      |
| o    | Space       | ö      |
| u    | Space       | ü      |
| s    | Space       | ß      |
| A (Shift+a) | Space | Ä |
| O (Shift+o) | Space | Ö |
| U (Shift+u) | Space | Ü |

---

## Troubleshooting

### Problem: Addon doesn't show in fcitx5-config-qt

**Diagnosis:**

```bash
ls -lh /usr/lib/fcitx5/schnelle-umlaute.so
ls -lh /usr/share/fcitx5/addon/schnelle-umlaute.conf
ls -lh /usr/share/fcitx5/inputmethod/schnelle-umlaute.conf
```

If any file is missing, reinstall:

```bash
cd ~/schnelle-umlaute/addon/build
sudo make install
fcitx5 -r
```

**Most common issue:** Missing `/usr/share/fcitx5/inputmethod/schnelle-umlaute.conf`

This file registers the addon as an **Input Method**. Without it, the addon won't appear in the input method list.

### Problem: Works in terminal but not in Firefox/Kate/other apps

**Diagnosis:**

```bash
echo $GTK_IM_MODULE
echo $QT_IM_MODULE
```

If both are empty, environment variables are not set.

**Solution:**

1. Re-run environment variable setup:
   ```bash
   mkdir -p ~/.config/environment.d
   cat > ~/.config/environment.d/fcitx5.conf << 'EOF'
   GTK_IM_MODULE=fcitx5
   QT_IM_MODULE=fcitx5
   XMODIFIERS=@im=fcitx5
   GLFW_IM_MODULE=ibus
   EOF
   ```

2. **Logout and login** (not just restart terminal!)

3. Verify after login:
   ```bash
   echo $GTK_IM_MODULE  # Should output: fcitx5
   ```

### Problem: Umlauts not appearing

**Check 1:** Are you on the correct input method?

```bash
# Check current IM
fcitx5-remote -n
```

Should show `schnelle-umlaute` or similar. If not, press `Ctrl+Space` to switch.

**Check 2:** Is Fcitx5 running?

```bash
ps aux | grep fcitx5
```

If not running:
```bash
fcitx5 &
```

**Check 3:** Timing issue

The Hold & Wait pattern requires pressing Space **within 400ms** of holding the key.

Try:
1. Press and hold `a`
2. **Immediately** press `Space` (don't wait!)
3. Release both keys

### Problem: Addon is visible but not activatable / Fcitx5 not responding

If you can see "Schnelle Umlaute" in fcitx5-config-qt but cannot activate it, or if Fcitx5 stopped working after a system crash:

1. **Check Fcitx5 status:**
   ```bash
   fcitx5-remote
   ```
   - Should show: `1` (inactive) or `2` (active)
   - If it shows: `0` → Fcitx5 not initialized

2. **Restart Fcitx5:**
   ```bash
   fcitx5 -r
   ```

3. **Activate addon:**
   ```bash
   fcitx5-remote -s schnelle-umlaute
   ```

4. **Verify:**
   ```bash
   fcitx5-remote -n  # Should show: schnelle-umlaute
   fcitx5-remote     # Should show: 2 (active)
   ```

This is common after system crashes or unexpected shutdowns.

### Problem: Build fails with C++ errors

**Error:**
```
error: 'span' in namespace 'std' does not name a template type
```

**Solution:** You need GCC 11+ with C++20 support:

```bash
gcc --version  # Should be 11.0 or higher
```

If older, update:
```bash
sudo pacman -Syu gcc
```

### Problem: KDE Wayland - Input method not working optimally

If you're using **KDE Plasma on Wayland**, configure virtual keyboard:

1. Open **System Settings** → **Virtual Keyboard**
2. Select **"Fcitx 5"** from the dropdown
3. Click **"Apply"**
4. Logout/login

This enables native Wayland input method protocol for better integration.

---

## Additional Configuration

### Change Default Hotkey

To change the input method switch hotkey from `Ctrl+Space`:

1. Open `fcitx5-config-qt`
2. Go to **"Global Options"** → **"Hotkey"**
3. Find **"Trigger Input Method"**
4. Click and press your desired hotkey
5. Click **"Apply"**

### Autostart Fcitx5

Fcitx5 should autostart by default. If not:

```bash
cp /usr/share/applications/org.fcitx.Fcitx5.desktop ~/.config/autostart/
```

Or use your desktop environment's autostart settings.

---

## Uninstallation

### Remove the Addon

```bash
cd ~/schnelle-umlaute/addon/build
sudo make uninstall
```

Or manually:

```bash
sudo rm /usr/lib/fcitx5/schnelle-umlaute.so
sudo rm /usr/share/fcitx5/addon/schnelle-umlaute.conf
sudo rm /usr/share/fcitx5/addon/org.fcitx.Fcitx5.Addon.SchnelleUmlaute.metainfo.xml
sudo rm /usr/share/fcitx5/inputmethod/schnelle-umlaute.conf
```

### Remove Environment Variables (Optional)

If you want to remove Fcitx5 entirely:

```bash
rm ~/.config/environment.d/fcitx5.conf
```

Then logout/login.

### Restart Fcitx5

```bash
fcitx5 -r
```

---

## Support

For issues, please:
1. Check this troubleshooting guide
2. Run `fcitx5-diagnose` and check output
3. Open an issue at: https://github.com/Maik-0000FF/schnelle-umlaute/issues

---

**Last Updated:** 2025-10-25
**Version:** 0.1.1
