README.md, before:

# Schnelle Umlaute - Fcitx5 Edition

> **Quick German Umlaut Input for Linux** - The clipboard-free solution!

Type German umlauts (ä, ö, ü, ß) on US keyboard layouts with a simple **hold + space** gesture, powered by Fcitx5.

## 🎯 What Makes This Special?

Unlike other solutions that use clipboard manipulation or keyboard simulation, this Fcitx5 addon uses **direct text insertion** (`commitString()`), which means:

✅ **NO clipboard interference** - Your clipboard stays untouched
✅ **NO root permissions** - Runs as normal user
✅ **Works on X11 AND Wayland** - Native support for both
✅ **Zero latency** - Hold & Wait pattern, no backspace needed
✅ **Perfect integration** - Part of Fcitx5, not a background daemon

## 🚀 How It Works

### Gesture Flow

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Waiting: Press 'a'
    Waiting --> Umlaut: Space within 400ms
    Waiting --> Normal: Release or timeout
    Umlaut --> [*]: ä ✨
    Normal --> [*]: a
```

### Step-by-Step Guide

#### 🔤 Lowercase Umlauts (400ms)

```mermaid
graph LR
    A["① Hold 'a'"] --> B["② Tap Space<br/>(within 400ms)"]
    B --> C["③ ä appears ✨"]

    style A fill:#64b5f6,stroke:#1976d2,stroke-width:3px,color:#000
    style B fill:#ffd54f,stroke:#f57f17,stroke-width:3px,color:#000
    style C fill:#81c784,stroke:#388e3c,stroke-width:3px,color:#000
```

**Works for:** `a`→`ä` | `o`→`ö` | `u`→`ü` | `s`→`ß`

#### 🔠 Uppercase Umlauts (700ms - longer for coordination)

```mermaid
graph LR
    A["① Hold Shift+A"] --> B["② Tap Space<br/>(within 700ms)<br/>Shift stays pressed!"]
    B --> C["③ Ä appears ✨"]

    style A fill:#64b5f6,stroke:#1976d2,stroke-width:3px,color:#000
    style B fill:#ffd54f,stroke:#f57f17,stroke-width:3px,color:#000
    style C fill:#81c784,stroke:#388e3c,stroke-width:3px,color:#000
```

**Works for:** `A`→`Ä` | `O`→`Ö` | `U`→`Ü`

## 📋 Requirements

- **Arch Linux** (or compatible distro)
- **Fcitx5** - Input Method Framework
- **CMake** and **extra-cmake-modules** - For building
- **GCC with C++20 support** - For compilation

## 📦 Installation

### Quick Start (Recommended)

The easiest way to install:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Maik-0000FF/schnelle-umlaute.git
cd schnelle-umlaute
./install.sh
```

The script will:
- Check and install dependencies
- Build and install the addon
- Configure environment variables automatically
- Guide you through the setup

**After installation:** Logout and login, then run `fcitx5-config-qt` to add "Schnelle Umlaute" to your input methods.

### Install via AUR (Coming Soon)

For Arch Linux users, the package will be available on AUR:

```bash
yay -S schnelle-umlaute-fcitx5
# or
paru -S schnelle-umlaute-fcitx5
```

### Manual Installation

If you prefer manual installation:

**1. Install Dependencies**

```bash
sudo pacman -S fcitx5 fcitx5-configtool fcitx5-qt fcitx5-gtk cmake extra-cmake-modules gcc
```

**2. Build the Addon**

```bash
cd addon
./build.sh
```

**3. Install**

```bash
cd build
sudo make install
```

**4. Configure Environment Variables**

For the addon to work in ALL applications (GTK, Qt, browsers, terminals, etc.), set up environment variables:

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.config/environment.d
cat > ~/.config/environment.d/fcitx5.conf << 'EOF'
GTK_IM_MODULE=fcitx5
QT_IM_MODULE=fcitx5
XMODIFIERS=@im=fcitx5
GLFW_IM_MODULE=ibus
EOF
```

**Note:** `GLFW_IM_MODULE=ibus` is required for Kitty terminal and other GLFW-based applications.

**5. Logout and Login**

**IMPORTANT:** You must logout and login again for the environment variables to take effect!

```bash
# After logout/login, verify Fcitx5 is running:
fcitx5 -r
```

## 🎮 Setup & Usage

### Configure Fcitx5

1. Open Fcitx5 configuration:
   ```bash
   fcitx5-config-qt
   ```

2. Go to **"Input Method"** tab (Eingabemethode)

3. Click **"+"** to add a new input method

4. Search for **"Schnelle Umlaute"**

5. Add it to your input methods

6. Click **"Apply"** or **"OK"**

### Using the Addon

1. **Switch to Schnelle Umlaute** input method (default: `Ctrl+Space`)

2. **Type umlauts:**

| Want | Hold        | Press | Result |
|------|-------------|-------|--------|
| ä    | a           | Space | ä      |
| ö    | o           | Space | ö      |
| ü    | u           | Space | ü      |
| ß    | s           | Space | ß      |
| Ä    | A (Shift+a) | Space | Ä      |
| Ö    | O (Shift+o) | Space | Ö      |
| Ü    | U (Shift+u) | Space | Ü      |

3. **Type normally:** If you don't press Space within the time window, the normal letter appears

## 🏗️ Architecture

This is a **native Fcitx5 addon** written in **C++**, using the Fcitx5 InputMethodEngineV2 API.

**Key Components:**
- `addon/src/schnelle-umlaute.cpp` - Main addon logic with Hold & Wait implementation
- `addon/CMakeLists.txt` - Build configuration
- `addon/data/schnelle-umlaute.conf` - Fcitx5 addon registration

**How it works internally:**
1. Fcitx5 calls our `keyEvent()` handler for every key
2. When accent key (a/o/u/s) is pressed: suppress output, start timer
3. If Space within delay (400ms lowercase, 700ms uppercase): call `commitString(umlaut)` for direct insertion
4. If timeout or key released: call `commitString(normalLetter)`
5. No clipboard, no key simulation - pure text insertion!

## 🆚 Comparison with Other Approaches

| Approach | Clipboard-Free | No Root | X11 | Wayland | Complexity |
|----------|---------------|---------|-----|---------|------------|
| **Fcitx5 Addon (This)** | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ | Medium |
| evdev-rs + xclip | ❌ | ❌ | ✅ | ⚠️ | Low |
| IBus | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ | High |
| XTest | ✅ | ❌ | ✅ | ❌ | Low |

## 🐛 Troubleshooting

### Addon not showing in fcitx5-config-qt

Check if all files are installed:
```bash
ls /usr/lib/fcitx5/schnelle-umlaute.so
ls /usr/share/fcitx5/addon/schnelle-umlaute.conf
ls /usr/share/fcitx5/inputmethod/schnelle-umlaute.conf  # This is important!
```

If missing, reinstall:
```bash
cd addon/build
sudo make install
fcitx5 -r
```

### Works in terminal but not in other apps (Firefox, Kate, etc.)

You need to set environment variables and **logout/login**:

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.config/environment.d
cat > ~/.config/environment.d/fcitx5.conf << 'EOF'
GTK_IM_MODULE=fcitx5
QT_IM_MODULE=fcitx5
XMODIFIERS=@im=fcitx5
GLFW_IM_MODULE=ibus
EOF
```

Then **logout and login again** for changes to take effect.

### Umlauts not appearing

1. Make sure you're switched to "Schnelle Umlaute" input method (Ctrl+Space)
2. Check Fcitx5 is running: `ps aux | grep fcitx5`
3. Try holding the key longer before pressing Space
4. Verify environment variables are set: `echo $GTK_IM_MODULE` (should output "fcitx5")

### Addon is visible but not activatable / Fcitx5 not responding

If you can see "Schnelle Umlaute" in fcitx5-config-qt but cannot activate it, or if Fcitx5 stopped working after a system crash:

1. **Check Fcitx5 status:**
   ```bash
   fcitx5-remote
   ```
   - Should show: `1` (inactive) or `2` (active)
   - If it shows: `0` → Fcitx5 not initialized

2. **Restart Fcitx5:**
   ```bash
   fcitx5 -r
   ```

3. **Activate addon:**
   ```bash
   fcitx5-remote -s schnelle-umlaute
   ```

4. **Verify:**
   ```bash
   fcitx5-remote -n  # Should show: schnelle-umlaute
   fcitx5-remote     # Should show: 2 (active)
   ```

This is common after system crashes or unexpected shutdowns.

### KDE Wayland users: "Fcitx should be launched by KWin" warning

If you see a warning about Fcitx5 not being launched by KWin, fix it for optimal Wayland experience:

1. Open **System Settings** → **Virtual Keyboard** (or search for "virtuell")
2. Select **"Fcitx 5"** from the dropdown (instead of "None")
3. Apply changes
4. **Restart your session** (logout/login)

This enables the native Wayland input method protocol and eliminates the warning.

### Kitty terminal not working

If the addon doesn't work in Kitty terminal, make sure you have set `GLFW_IM_MODULE=ibus` in your environment variables (see step 4 of Installation), then **logout and login**.

### Build errors

Make sure you have C++20 support:
```bash
gcc --version  # Should be 11 or newer
```

## 🗑️ Uninstallation

### Quick Uninstall (Recommended)

```bash
./uninstall.sh
```

The script will:
- Remove all installed files
- Ask if you want to remove environment configuration
- Restart Fcitx5

### Manual Uninstallation

```bash
cd addon/build
sudo make uninstall
fcitx5 -r
```

Or remove files manually:
```bash
sudo rm /usr/lib/fcitx5/schnelle-umlaute.so
sudo rm /usr/share/fcitx5/addon/schnelle-umlaute.conf
sudo rm /usr/share/fcitx5/addon/org.fcitx.Fcitx5.Addon.SchnelleUmlaute.metainfo.xml
sudo rm /usr/share/fcitx5/inputmethod/schnelle-umlaute.conf
rm ~/.config/environment.d/fcitx5.conf  # Optional: remove environment config
fcitx5 -r
```

## 📚 Documentation

- **[INSTALL.md](INSTALL.md)** - Complete installation guide with troubleshooting
- **[addon/README.md](addon/README.md)** - Detailed addon documentation

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions welcome! This addon is:
- Written in **C++20**
- Uses **Fcitx5 InputMethodEngineV2 API**
- Built with **CMake**

## 🍺 Support

Help keep Schnelle Umlaute awesome! Here's how you can contribute:

```mermaid
graph TB
    Start["🍺 Ways to Support<br/>Schnelle Umlaute"]

    subgraph one["💰 Financial"]
        Bitcoin["₿ Bitcoin Donation<br/><code>bc1q6gmpgfn4wx2hx2c3njgpep9tl00etma9k7w6d4</code><br/><i>Every ä, ö, ü counts!</i>"]
    end

    subgraph two["🌟 Community"]
        Star["⭐ Star the Repository<br/><i>Show your appreciation</i>"]
        Share["📢 Share with Others<br/><i>Spread the word</i>"]
        Report["🐛 Report Bugs<br/><i>Help improve quality</i>"]
    end

    subgraph three["🛠️ Development"]
        Code["🔧 Contribute Code<br/><i>Add features or fixes</i>"]
        Docs["📝 Improve Documentation<br/><i>Help others learn</i>"]
        Ideas["💡 Suggest Features<br/><i>Shape the roadmap</i>"]
    end

    Start --> one
    Start --> two
    Start --> three

    style Start fill:#64b5f6,stroke:#1976d2,stroke-width:3px,color:#000
    style Bitcoin fill:#ff8a65,stroke:#d84315,stroke-width:2px,color:#000
    style Star fill:#81c784,stroke:#388e3c,stroke-width:2px,color:#000
    style Share fill:#81c784,stroke:#388e3c,stroke-width:2px,color:#000
    style Report fill:#81c784,stroke:#388e3c,stroke-width:2px,color:#000
    style Code fill:#ba68c8,stroke:#7b1fa2,stroke-width:2px,color:#000
    style Docs fill:#ba68c8,stroke:#7b1fa2,stroke-width:2px,color:#000
    style Ideas fill:#ba68c8,stroke:#7b1fa2,stroke-width:2px,color:#000
```

_Because every umlaut saved is a keystroke earned - and keystrokes fuel open source!_ ⌨️✨

## 📄 License

GPL-3.0+

## 👨‍💻 Author

Created by [Maik-0000FF](https://github.com/Maik-0000FF)

## 🙏 Credits

Inspired by [Windows PowerToys Quick Accent](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/powertoys/quick-accent)

Built with:
- **Fcitx5** - Input Method Framework
- **C++20** - Modern C++ with chrono and optional
- **CMake** - Build system
- **Extra CMake Modules (ECM)** - KDE build tools

---

**Version:** 0.1.1
**Status:** Working - tested and functional
**Date:** 2025-10-25

Commit message:

feat: Improve tray label and add Kitty troubleshooting
Changes:
- Update tray label from "ä" to "Ää" for better visibility
- Add comprehensive Kitty terminal troubleshooting section
- Document tray icon behavior for different input methods
- Add workaround for Kitty's Wayland input context issue

The new "Ää" label makes it clearer when Schnelle Umlaute is active.
Kitty users can now fix focus issues by using X11 backend.

README.md, after:

# Schnelle Umlaute - Fcitx5 Edition

> **Quick German Umlaut Input for Linux** - The clipboard-free solution!

Type German umlauts (ä, ö, ü, ß) on US keyboard layouts with a simple **hold + space** gesture, powered by Fcitx5.

## 🎯 What Makes This Special?

Unlike other solutions that use clipboard manipulation or keyboard simulation, this Fcitx5 addon uses **direct text insertion** (`commitString()`), which means:

✅ **NO clipboard interference** - Your clipboard stays untouched
✅ **NO root permissions** - Runs as normal user
✅ **Works on X11 AND Wayland** - Native support for both
✅ **Zero latency** - Hold & Wait pattern, no backspace needed
✅ **Perfect integration** - Part of Fcitx5, not a background daemon

## 🚀 How It Works

### Gesture Flow

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    [*] --> Waiting: Press 'a'
    Waiting --> Umlaut: Space within 400ms
    Waiting --> Normal: Release or timeout
    Umlaut --> [*]: ä ✨
    Normal --> [*]: a
```

### Step-by-Step Guide

#### 🔤 Lowercase Umlauts (400ms)

```mermaid
graph LR
    A["① Hold 'a'"] --> B["② Tap Space<br/>(within 400ms)"]
    B --> C["③ ä appears ✨"]

    style A fill:#64b5f6,stroke:#1976d2,stroke-width:3px,color:#000
    style B fill:#ffd54f,stroke:#f57f17,stroke-width:3px,color:#000
    style C fill:#81c784,stroke:#388e3c,stroke-width:3px,color:#000
```

**Works for:** `a`→`ä` | `o`→`ö` | `u`→`ü` | `s`→`ß`

#### 🔠 Uppercase Umlauts (700ms - longer for coordination)

```mermaid
graph LR
    A["① Hold Shift+A"] --> B["② Tap Space<br/>(within 700ms)<br/>Shift stays pressed!"]
    B --> C["③ Ä appears ✨"]

    style A fill:#64b5f6,stroke:#1976d2,stroke-width:3px,color:#000
    style B fill:#ffd54f,stroke:#f57f17,stroke-width:3px,color:#000
    style C fill:#81c784,stroke:#388e3c,stroke-width:3px,color:#000
```

**Works for:** `A`→`Ä` | `O`→`Ö` | `U`→`Ü`

## 📋 Requirements

- **Arch Linux** (or compatible distro)
- **Fcitx5** - Input Method Framework
- **CMake** and **extra-cmake-modules** - For building
- **GCC with C++20 support** - For compilation

## 📦 Installation

### Quick Start (Recommended)

The easiest way to install:

```bash
git clone https://github.com/Maik-0000FF/schnelle-umlaute.git
cd schnelle-umlaute
./install.sh
```

The script will:
- Check and install dependencies
- Build and install the addon
- Configure environment variables automatically
- Guide you through the setup

**After installation:** Logout and login, then run `fcitx5-config-qt` to add "Schnelle Umlaute" to your input methods.

### Install via AUR (Coming Soon)

For Arch Linux users, the package will be available on AUR:

```bash
yay -S schnelle-umlaute-fcitx5
# or
paru -S schnelle-umlaute-fcitx5
```

### Manual Installation

If you prefer manual installation:

**1. Install Dependencies**

```bash
sudo pacman -S fcitx5 fcitx5-configtool fcitx5-qt fcitx5-gtk cmake extra-cmake-modules gcc
```

**2. Build the Addon**

```bash
cd addon
./build.sh
```

**3. Install**

```bash
cd build
sudo make install
```

**4. Configure Environment Variables**

For the addon to work in ALL applications (GTK, Qt, browsers, terminals, etc.), set up environment variables:

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.config/environment.d
cat > ~/.config/environment.d/fcitx5.conf << 'EOF'
GTK_IM_MODULE=fcitx5
QT_IM_MODULE=fcitx5
XMODIFIERS=@im=fcitx5
GLFW_IM_MODULE=ibus
EOF
```

**Note:** `GLFW_IM_MODULE=ibus` is required for Kitty terminal and other GLFW-based applications.

**5. Logout and Login**

**IMPORTANT:** You must logout and login again for the environment variables to take effect!

```bash
# After logout/login, verify Fcitx5 is running:
fcitx5 -r
```

## 🎮 Setup & Usage

### Configure Fcitx5

1. Open Fcitx5 configuration:
   ```bash
   fcitx5-config-qt
   ```

2. Go to **"Input Method"** tab (Eingabemethode)

3. Click **"+"** to add a new input method

4. Search for **"Schnelle Umlaute"**

5. Add it to your input methods

6. Click **"Apply"** or **"OK"**

### Using the Addon

1. **Switch to Schnelle Umlaute** input method (default: `Ctrl+Space`)
   - When active, the Fcitx5 tray icon will show **"Ää"**
   - When using normal keyboard, it shows "En" or "US"

2. **Type umlauts:**

| Want | Hold        | Press | Result |
|------|-------------|-------|--------|
| ä    | a           | Space | ä      |
| ö    | o           | Space | ö      |
| ü    | u           | Space | ü      |
| ß    | s           | Space | ß      |
| Ä    | A (Shift+a) | Space | Ä      |
| Ö    | O (Shift+o) | Space | Ö      |
| Ü    | U (Shift+u) | Space | Ü      |

3. **Type normally:** If you don't press Space within the time window, the normal letter appears

## 🏗️ Architecture

This is a **native Fcitx5 addon** written in **C++**, using the Fcitx5 InputMethodEngineV2 API.

**Key Components:**
- `addon/src/schnelle-umlaute.cpp` - Main addon logic with Hold & Wait implementation
- `addon/CMakeLists.txt` - Build configuration
- `addon/data/schnelle-umlaute.conf` - Fcitx5 addon registration

**How it works internally:**
1. Fcitx5 calls our `keyEvent()` handler for every key
2. When accent key (a/o/u/s) is pressed: suppress output, start timer
3. If Space within delay (400ms lowercase, 700ms uppercase): call `commitString(umlaut)` for direct insertion
4. If timeout or key released: call `commitString(normalLetter)`
5. No clipboard, no key simulation - pure text insertion!

## 🆚 Comparison with Other Approaches

| Approach | Clipboard-Free | No Root | X11 | Wayland | Complexity |
|----------|---------------|---------|-----|---------|------------|
| **Fcitx5 Addon (This)** | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ | Medium |
| evdev-rs + xclip | ❌ | ❌ | ✅ | ⚠️ | Low |
| IBus | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ | ✅ | High |
| XTest | ✅ | ❌ | ✅ | ❌ | Low |

## 🐛 Troubleshooting

### Addon not showing in fcitx5-config-qt

Check if all files are installed:
```bash
ls /usr/lib/fcitx5/schnelle-umlaute.so
ls /usr/share/fcitx5/addon/schnelle-umlaute.conf
ls /usr/share/fcitx5/inputmethod/schnelle-umlaute.conf  # This is important!
```

If missing, reinstall:
```bash
cd addon/build
sudo make install
fcitx5 -r
```

### Works in terminal but not in other apps (Firefox, Kate, etc.)

You need to set environment variables and **logout/login**:

```bash
mkdir -p ~/.config/environment.d
cat > ~/.config/environment.d/fcitx5.conf << 'EOF'
GTK_IM_MODULE=fcitx5
QT_IM_MODULE=fcitx5
XMODIFIERS=@im=fcitx5
GLFW_IM_MODULE=ibus
EOF
```

Then **logout and login again** for changes to take effect.

### Umlauts not appearing

1. Make sure you're switched to "Schnelle Umlaute" input method (Ctrl+Space)
2. Check Fcitx5 is running: `ps aux | grep fcitx5`
3. Try holding the key longer before pressing Space
4. Verify environment variables are set: `echo $GTK_IM_MODULE` (should output "fcitx5")

### Addon is visible but not activatable / Fcitx5 not responding

If you can see "Schnelle Umlaute" in fcitx5-config-qt but cannot activate it, or if Fcitx5 stopped working after a system crash:

1. **Check Fcitx5 status:**
   ```bash
   fcitx5-remote
   ```
   - Should show: `1` (inactive) or `2` (active)
   - If it shows: `0` → Fcitx5 not initialized

2. **Restart Fcitx5:**
   ```bash
   fcitx5 -r
   ```

3. **Activate addon:**
   ```bash
   fcitx5-remote -s schnelle-umlaute
   ```

4. **Verify:**
   ```bash
   fcitx5-remote -n  # Should show: schnelle-umlaute
   fcitx5-remote     # Should show: 2 (active)
   ```

This is common after system crashes or unexpected shutdowns.

### KDE Wayland users: "Fcitx should be launched by KWin" warning

If you see a warning about Fcitx5 not being launched by KWin, fix it for optimal Wayland experience:

1. Open **System Settings** → **Virtual Keyboard** (or search for "virtuell")
2. Select **"Fcitx 5"** from the dropdown (instead of "None")
3. Apply changes
4. **Restart your session** (logout/login)

This enables the native Wayland input method protocol and eliminates the warning.

### Kitty terminal not working

**Symptom:** The input method indicator doesn't change when pressing Ctrl+Space in Kitty, or the indicator appears in other windows instead of Kitty.

**Cause:** Kitty's Wayland text-input implementation doesn't properly register the input context with Fcitx5, causing Fcitx5 to not recognize the Kitty window.

**Solution:** Configure Kitty to use X11 (XWayland) instead of native Wayland:

1. Add to `~/.config/kitty/kitty.conf`:
   ```
   linux_display_server x11
   ```

2. Restart all Kitty windows (close and reopen)

3. Test: Press Ctrl+Space in Kitty - the input method indicator should now appear in Kitty

**Note:** Make sure you also have `GLFW_IM_MODULE=ibus` set in your environment variables (see step 4 of Installation).

### Build errors

Make sure you have C++20 support:
```bash
gcc --version  # Should be 11 or newer
```

## 🗑️ Uninstallation

### Quick Uninstall (Recommended)

```bash
./uninstall.sh
```

The script will:
- Remove all installed files
- Ask if you want to remove environment configuration
- Restart Fcitx5

### Manual Uninstallation

```bash
cd addon/build
sudo make uninstall
fcitx5 -r
```

Or remove files manually:
```bash
sudo rm /usr/lib/fcitx5/schnelle-umlaute.so
sudo rm /usr/share/fcitx5/addon/schnelle-umlaute.conf
sudo rm /usr/share/fcitx5/addon/org.fcitx.Fcitx5.Addon.SchnelleUmlaute.metainfo.xml
sudo rm /usr/share/fcitx5/inputmethod/schnelle-umlaute.conf
rm ~/.config/environment.d/fcitx5.conf  # Optional: remove environment config
fcitx5 -r
```

## 📚 Documentation

- **[INSTALL.md](INSTALL.md)** - Complete installation guide with troubleshooting
- **[addon/README.md](addon/README.md)** - Detailed addon documentation

## 🤝 Contributing

Contributions welcome! This addon is:
- Written in **C++20**
- Uses **Fcitx5 InputMethodEngineV2 API**
- Built with **CMake**

## 🍺 Support

Help keep Schnelle Umlaute awesome! Here's how you can contribute:

```mermaid
graph TB
    Start["🍺 Ways to Support<br/>Schnelle Umlaute"]

    subgraph one["💰 Financial"]
        Bitcoin["₿ Bitcoin Donation<br/><code>bc1q6gmpgfn4wx2hx2c3njgpep9tl00etma9k7w6d4</code><br/><i>Every ä, ö, ü counts!</i>"]
    end

    subgraph two["🌟 Community"]
        Star["⭐ Star the Repository<br/><i>Show your appreciation</i>"]
        Share["📢 Share with Others<br/><i>Spread the word</i>"]
        Report["🐛 Report Bugs<br/><i>Help improve quality</i>"]
    end

    subgraph three["🛠️ Development"]
        Code["🔧 Contribute Code<br/><i>Add features or fixes</i>"]
        Docs["📝 Improve Documentation<br/><i>Help others learn</i>"]
        Ideas["💡 Suggest Features<br/><i>Shape the roadmap</i>"]
    end

    Start --> one
    Start --> two
    Start --> three

    style Start fill:#64b5f6,stroke:#1976d2,stroke-width:3px,color:#000
    style Bitcoin fill:#ff8a65,stroke:#d84315,stroke-width:2px,color:#000
    style Star fill:#81c784,stroke:#388e3c,stroke-width:2px,color:#000
    style Share fill:#81c784,stroke:#388e3c,stroke-width:2px,color:#000
    style Report fill:#81c784,stroke:#388e3c,stroke-width:2px,color:#000
    style Code fill:#ba68c8,stroke:#7b1fa2,stroke-width:2px,color:#000
    style Docs fill:#ba68c8,stroke:#7b1fa2,stroke-width:2px,color:#000
    style Ideas fill:#ba68c8,stroke:#7b1fa2,stroke-width:2px,color:#000
```

_Because every umlaut saved is a keystroke earned - and keystrokes fuel open source!_ ⌨️✨

## 📄 License

GPL-3.0+

## 👨‍💻 Author

Created by [Maik-0000FF](https://github.com/Maik-0000FF)

## 🙏 Credits

Inspired by [Windows PowerToys Quick Accent](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/powertoys/quick-accent)

Built with:
- **Fcitx5** - Input Method Framework
- **C++20** - Modern C++ with chrono and optional
- **CMake** - Build system
- **Extra CMake Modules (ECM)** - KDE build tools

---

**Version:** 0.1.1
**Status:** Working - tested and functional
**Date:** 2025-10-25
